#About this Site

This website aims to help people who meditate find a comfortable posture. I am not an expert on posture, but I have read widely on the subject. I also have several years of experience in practicing meditation. During the first few years, I had some trouble with learning how to get comfortable, and I would like to help others avoid the difficulties that I initially experienced.

##For Beginners

If you are new to meditation, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you on taking the first steps toward what may become an extraordinary experience. There are many benefits to meditation. Do not be deterred by your preliminary troubles. Stay determined and practice every day. The journey is well worth the time and effort.

##For Teachers

If you are a meditation instructor, or an expert on posture or physiology, I would love to hear from you. I would appreciate your feedback on how the information on this site may be improved. 

##A Note on Sources

Much of the information on this website has been gathered from books. A list of sources is linked in the sidebar, and may also be found [here](sources). Throughout this site, I use parenthetical references to cite to the sources in the list. These references use the last name of the author, followed by a page number.  For example, a citation to *Taking the Path of Zen* by Robert Aitken, page 15, would look like this: (Aitken 15).

##A Note on Pictures

This site consists of text only, without any photography or images to help you along. In a prior version of this site, I experimented with using pictures and images to help illustrate the content. I am sure that the site could benefit from some good photography. 

However, I eventually abandoned this effort, because I felt that the pictures could be a little bit misleading. The problem is, everyone's body and posture are a little bit different. Good posture for one person may look a little different from good posture for another. And quite frankly, my own posture is a work in progress and far from picture-perfect. As a result, I am going to try and explain my advice as clearly as possible in plain text, and I will leave it to the reader to search for images where they feel the need for illustration.

I may add a few pictures as time goes by. Also, if you are interested in submitting pictures for use on this site, please feel free to email me.

##Contacting the Author

If you have any questions or comments about this site, you are welcome to email me at:

greenoakforest@protonmail.com
