#The Benefits of Sitting

The practice of meditation has become increasingly popular, and many people wonder how to get started.  For the majority of people, the best way to begin is simply to learn how to arrange the body in a comfortable sitting position.  When the body is comfortable and relaxed, the mind can relax as well.

Although this is a guide on posture, it should be noted at the outset that it is not necessary to assume a specific physical posture in order to take up the practice of meditation.  One can meditate quite well reclining in a soft chair, laying down on a mattress, or even walking outdoors.  Sitting in a chair may be the only option for a person with an injury or arthritis or just common muscle stiffness.  Such conditions should not inhibit your enthusiasm for taking up the practice.

Nevertheless, for those who have the option, there are some benefits to undertaking the endeavor of meditation by sitting upright without a back rest.  Sitting without a prop for the back, when done comfortably, is both active and relaxing.  It allows the body to settle into a restful position while helping to keep the mind alert.  In addition, sitting upright with good posture is comfortable for long periods of time.  In the Zen tradition of Buddhism, posture is considered of to be of the utmost importance.  Perhaps this is what lead Zen master Shunryu Suzuki to say the following:

>These forms are not a means of obtaining the right state of mind.  To take this posture itself is the purpose of our practice.  When you have this posture, you have the right state of mind, so there is no need to attain some special state.i

However, Master Suzuki's comments should not be construed to suggest that there is only one right way to position the body for meditation.  In the same text he also says the following:

>Just as for sitting, when we stand in the zendo [meditation center] we have some rules.  But the purpose of these rules is not to make everyone the same, but to allow each to express his own self most freely.  For instance, each one of us has his own way of standing, so our standing posture is based on the proportions of our own bodies . . . The most important point is to own your own physical body . . . You must have your own body and mind.  Everything should exist in the right place, in the right way.  Then there is no problem.

Personally, I like to sit on a Japanese-style cushion called a zafu.  While sitting on a special cushion is not necessary (one can meditate as well sitting in a chair), a cushion is cheap and portable.  You can easily move your 
cushion to any room in the house, or take it with you traveling or to a group meditation session.  And once you get accustomed to using it, sitting on a cushion becomes as comfortable as sitting in a padded chair, while keeping you more alert and awake.  Finally, many traditional meditation centers us cushions (although most now also provide chairs), and if you know how to sit comfortably on a cushion, you will find it easier to get comfortable at the center.

As a final note on the benefits of posture, I should add that learning to become comfortable while sitting in meditation will pay dividends in other areas of life.  You will be also be more comfortable everywhere else, whether sitting on a stool or bench, or standing for long periods of time.  It may seem confusing or difficult at first, but it is well worth persisting through the early difficulties.  Once you have learned good posture, it will improve your overall quality of life. 


