#The Importance of Comfort

##Comfort is the Goal

The main objective of your meditation posture should be comfort.  While this may seem obvious to many, there is a significant portion of meditators who begin their practice with a mindset of perseverance, and this mindset spills over into their approach to posture.  These individuals seem to think that learning to sit for long periods of time without back support will require substantial physical discomfort, and they just need to tough it out. Fortunately, this is not how good posture works. In general, significant discomfort is an indicator that there is something wrong with the way you are sitting. Wil Johnson, in his book "The Posture of Meditation" does an excellent job of explaining this point:

>The alignment you seek is a completely natural and comfortable condition.  It is not an artificial and rigid condition like the standing military posture (35). . . Alignment that conforms to the directional flow of gravity has a distinct feeling tone of rightness to it.  This feeling tone, or lack of it, becomes our primary guide as we attempt to find this place of alignment and bring it into our sitting posture (28) . . . Paying more attention to the feeling tone of alignment rather than to its spatial coordinates allows us to align ourselves with gravity from the inside out. (29)

These observations by Mr. Johnson generally accord with my own experience. Whenever I have experienced significant muscle tension, cramping, or fatigue, it has been a clear indication that I am trying to impose a position on my body that is sub-optimal. Toughing it out has generally just made the problem worse.

##Some Discomfort is Inevitable

On the other hand, it is also important to bear in mind that some amount of discomfort is unavoidable. With practice and experience, you will come to appreciate the fact that the human body loves to complain. But you will also learn that discomfort that is patiently endured has a way of disappearing in due time. 

Ultimately, as you continue to practice meditation, you will gain an intuition about those forms of discomfort that can be safely ignored, and those forms of discomfort that signal the need for a change of position. Here are some general guidelines:

* If discomfort is mild, it may be safely ignored.
* If discomfort is severe, you need to change position.
* If discomfort is intermittent, it can probably be ignored. But if it's persistent and getting worse, you should probably change position.
* If the discomfort arises from muscular tension or cramping, you need to change position. This may only require a subtle adjustment to your alignment. 
* If your discomfort is in a joint, especially the knee, it should be avoided. It's best to change position.
* When you are trying out a new posture, especially if you are not accustomed to sitting upright, you are probably going to be uncomfortable at first. If a position is unfamiliar, the mind tends to interpret that sense of unfamiliarity as discomfort. You may need to try something out for awhile before it starts to feel natural. When trying a new position, start with short intervals (even just 5 minutes) and work your way up.
* Finally, to the extent that the specific advice in this guide results in making you uncomfortable, please ignore that specific advice and do whatever is necessary to place yourself in a relaxing and sustainable position.
