
# Positioning the Head

Once you have arranged your lower body, torso, and shoulders in a well-aligned posture, you need only consider a minor adjustment to the neck. Bring your chin slightly down. This will lengthen the back of the neck, help the shoulders relax, and reduce tension in the mid back. should find that your head lines up naturally in a stable and comfortable position. You most likely will not need to make any special effort to hold your head in some particular way. My advice is, relax and don't worry about it.

I tend to think about posture as proceeding from the ground up. First you start with the legs, then consider the lower back, then the chest and shoulders, and finally the head. By the time you get to the head, it's pretty much aligned in the right place.

All of that being said, there are several different perspectives on how to position the head. It's worth considering a few of the ideas below.

## Keep the Chin Tucked

The most common advice with regard to the head is that it should be held up straight with the back of the neck long. This means that the chin will be gently tucked. In my experience, this seems like good advice. This also accords with the advice given by Gokhale and Porter. (Gokhale 44; Porter 109)

If the opposite is done, if the chin is lifted or extended, then the muscles of the back of the neck become engaged. If this muscle engagement is sustained for long periods of time, the neck can become fatigued, resulting in soreness or tension.

One common way of trying to get the feel of keeping a tucked chin, without drooping the head, is to imagine you have a string attached to the crown of your head, drawing your head up toward the ceiling. This is can be a very helpful visualization. But remember, be careful not to lift the chest while you are attempting to lift the head.

## Zen Perspectives 

Zen teachers tend to specifically encourage vertical head alignment. In my local Zen center, I was taught to tuck my chin, so that I felt some gentle pressure at the base of the skull. I have tried this, and I think it was helpful, but did not seem to make a dramatic difference in my level of comfort. I have also see several Zen teacher tell their students that the head should "press up" toward the ceiling. I have found that if I keep my chin tucked but lean my torso back just a little bit, I do indeed have the sense of the head pressing up. Perhaps this is what they mean. 

In Dogen's Zazengi, an ancient guide on the practice of Zen, the author stats that the ears should be aligned with the shoulders, and the nose aligned with the navel. It's difficult to know exactly what this means, because the "shoulders" could mean anything from the collar bone to the top the trapezius muscle. I suspect this was just Dogen's rather specific way of telling his students not to slump. (See Dogen / Leucut p. 8)

## The Alexander Technique

In the late 1800s Frederick Matthias Alexander created the "Alexander Technique", a educational process designed to retrain habitual patterns of movement and posture. Since that time, Mr. Alexander's work has been highly influential in the fields of posture and movement therapy. (Gelb 7-23) 

I am obligated to mention the Alexander Technique, because it is practically the inverse of my own approach. I start with the legs and lower back and work up from that foundation. The Alexander Technique identifies the head and eyes as being the locus of primary control, and the position of the head and neck as the prime factor in coordinating the rest of the body. (Gelb 43)

>Alexander's experience taught him that the relationship of the head, neck and torso was of primary importance in determinant his level of functioning and in organizing his reactions into a coordinated whole. He coined the phrase 'Primary Control' to indicate this relationship. (Gelb 43-44)

I believe the primary reason for this stark difference between my approach to posture and the Alexander Technique is that my overriding concern is with sitting, whereas Mr. Alexander's was interested in whole body movement involving all different types of positions and situations. Mr. Alexander first arrived at his understanding of posture while working on his singing voice, and his work has seen the its greatest degree of influence among singers, dancers, and stage performers. This is not to suggest that his technique is inapplicable to the act of sitting for meditation, but only that his method is designed to serve a broader set of interests and activities.

Another reason for the difference between my approach to posture and the Alexander Technique is that I began my education on posture through books on Zen (an influence that is apparent throughout these writings). Eastern approaches to movement and posture tend to focus on the belly, pelvis, and lower back. A contemporary writer on the Alexander Technique has commented on the difference and on how the two different perspective might be reconciled. (See Gelb 155)
